Lab 1: Computer Networks
Page 1: What Is the Internet?
Exercise 1: The Internet is a technology (including hardware and software) that allows a connection between any two Internet-enabled computers, regardless of the content of the connection. The World Wide Web is a technology that uses the Internet to allow a user at one computer to read content published by any other Internet-enabled computer. It is the technology used by the browser software installed on most computers.

Exercises 2–4: Most computers, in homes or small businesses, have just one hardware connection to the Internet, provided by their telephone company or cable TV company (their Internet Service Provider or ISP). (If the computer is a smartphone or tablet, the connection is wireless, but that still counts.) Those computers are at the very outside of the graph. The ISP has computers in each neighborhood to which customer computers are connected by hardware (typically by way of a customer router). Those ISP neighborhood connection points are the second level into the graph. The "fireworks" appearance reflects the fact that everyone in the neighborhood connects to one such connection point (a router at the ISP), so a lot of lines come together there. (If a computer is located at a large business or school, the organization may have its own connection points serving, for example, each building; those then connect to an ISP.) Because your computer only has one route onto the Internet, any message your computer sends takes the same route, to your ISP. But once the message reaches the ISP, things get more complicated. The neighborhood connection point probably connects to a city connection point, but after that, the routers have to know roughly where your message is going and which of several routes it should take. These complicated routers are the tangle in the middle, where each point connects to many other points. Then eventually the message reaches the other endpoint's ISP (maybe different from yours, another reason for the tangle) and then finds its way to a neighborhood connection point and finally to the destination computer.
Page 2: Network Redundancy
Exercise 1: The animation shows that there are many possible paths between two nodes on a network with redundancy, and if one node fails, other nodes can still communicate. (It's worth noting that this picture is partly unrealistic with respect to the Internet. As noted on page 1 of this lab, most of the computers on the Internet have just one connection, to an ISP. If that connection fails, there's no way to route around it. This animation is more realistic as a model of the tangle in the middle of the Internet, in which ISPs talk to each other. But that's the part where redundancy is most important. If your connection to your ISP fails, that's bad for you, but doesn't affect anyone else. But if AT&T can't talk to Verizon, that would be a huge problem.)
Exercise 3:
One way to think about this is to note that every once in a while your TV loses a frame of the video, but that's not a disaster, because your brain provides the missing continuity. But in a data transfer, a similar glitch would tell your bank to send Amazon $100,027.95 instead of $27.95. It's to avoid such problems that the Internet was designed for fault tolerance. The point about the millions of computers is that your TV hardly ever glitches, but someone's TV glitches every second, round the clock. And the same with computers. Every second, someone's data is corrupted in transit, and the network protocols have to catch this and correct the problem.
This page is about fault tolerance through redundant hardware. But software also contributes to fault tolerance: Error checking and correction protocols, the ability to change routing in the middle of a connection, and redundant storage of routing information are examples.
It's hard to imagine how the entire Internet could fail, even in nightmare scenarios such as nuclear war. But every so often a large chunk of the net, such as all of a country, can be off the net at once, either because several hardware routes into the country all fail at once (one recent example was probably due to deliberate sabotage) or because the routing information databases are corrupted (which used to happen accidentally from time to time, but is now also probably sabotage, or censorship by the country itself).
Page 3: Internet Abstractions and Open Protocols
Exercise 1: This is an open-ended question whose answer could fill a book, but here's a fairly brief answer: The stream of data is broken into packets (usually by TCP but maybe by IP) so that the entire stream doesn't have to be resent if an error occurs. If it's a TCP packet, then the TCP software attaches a serial number to it, so that TCP at the receiver can reassemble the packets in the correct order. The IP software in the user's computer combines the packet data with a packet header that says where the packet should go (the other computer's IP address and a port number to address the packet to a particular program running on that computer). The augmented packet is sent to the user's local router, and from there to the ISP, where routing magic happens so that it arrives at the recipient computer. That computer's IP software figures out which process should handle this packet, probably a TCP process, which does error checking, asks the sender to resend missing packets (after waiting a few minutes), and sends the reconstructed data stream to another process that knows what to do with it.
Exercise 2:
HTTP abstracts away the details of formatting of the information in a web page. The original design of the web was that servers would send pages with only information categories such as paragraph, table, subheading, and—the crucial innovation that makes the web one vast "hypertext" document—link. Browsers would use those categories to format the information on the user's screen. This clean division, with servers providing information and clients providing formatting, is no longer the case; businesses, in particular, want to control in great detail exactly how a page looks to the user, and so the language understood by HTTP (called HTML) now includes ways to control the font, size, color, and positioning of each piece of text. (Browsers may still change the appearance of the page because, for example, the screen is too small to display the page as the server sent it, or because the user is visually impaired and tells the browser to increase the size of the text.)
TCP abstracts away the fact that errors can happen on the network; it provides the user with the illusion of a contiguous stream of data, of any length, despite the corruption or complete disappearance of packets.
IP abstracts away the fact that the Internet is a network of networks, and that there's almost certainly no direct connection between your computer and the one you want to send information to. It translates the other computer's IP address into a decision about which of the directly connected computers is best able to forward the message toward its destination. (That's an easy choice for IP on your computer, which only connects to one router, but the routers nearer to the center of the IP graph have much more complicated decisions to make.)
Page 4: Who's In Charge of the Internet? (There are no exercises.)
