Lab 2: Cybersecurity
Page 1: Cryptography
Exercise 4: The decryption algorithm is exactly the same as the encryption algorithm, but using the negative of the original shift amount.
Exercise 5 (If There Is Time): The standard method starts by counting the frequency of occurrence of each letter in the ciphertext and comparing with the known frequency of occurrence of each letter in normal English text. If the word breaks are visible in the ciphertext (as they are in cryptogram puzzles) then a letter that appears as a word by itself must be A or I. A frequently-occurring run of three frequently-occurring letters is almost certainly "the," and so on.
Exercise 6 (If There Is Time): The reason simple substitution ciphers are vulnerable to letter frequency analysis is that a given cleartext letter is always mapped to the same ciphertext letter throughout the message. Improvements start by changing the mapping between letters. The simplest way to do that is a systematic change to the shift amount between letters. That is, if the first letter is encrypted with a shift of 3, then use a shift of 4 for the second letter, a shift of 5 for the third, and so on. Experiment with an actual text and you'll see that no letters jump out at you as being especially frequent in the ciphertext. Of course, if you just use a constant shift-change amount between letters, modern computers can quickly try different change amounts as well as different initial shifts. But this idea—using letter-for-letter substitution but with an algorithmic change to the substitution rule between letters—is the principle behind the famous German Enigma machine, which changed the algorithm for each message and had a huge repertoire of algorithms, and it was considered unbreakable until Turing's group of mathematicians finally broke it.

Page 3: Public Key Encryption
Our intention is not to require the students to understand the mathematics of any particular cryptographic function, but they should understand the general idea of a "one-way function": a function that's fast to compute, but whose inverse is slow (exponential time) to compute. (Recent improvements in security have mostly come not from entirely new functions, but simply from increasing key length. For decades the standard was 1024-bit keys, but it turns out that the NSA has the computer capacity to break those, so now 2048-bit keys are used by people who want real security. Even the NSA won't be able to break those unless they discover a weakness in the actual mathematical function used.) The public key enables the forward direction of the cryptographic function, but without the private key the inverse function is intractable. Everyone trusts public key cryptography enough to bank and shop online, which would otherwise be inconceivable.

Page 4: Who Cares About Encryption?
Exercise 3: Government vs. business vs. civil libertarians
Governments generally want medium-good security, so that businesses can thrive, and nobody other than the government can break the ciphers, but the government can. The US government has a long history of trying to maintain control over cryptography. For example, the Clipper chip was an NSA-designed encryption processor that the government tried to get businesses to adopt as the standard encryption mechanism. It had pretty good security except for an explicit "back door" password that would be known to the government. Of course nobody who actually had secrets would use it, not so much because they specifically wanted to keep secrets from the government as because any such back door is a weakness that would eventually be exploited by criminals. Arguments for the government include the need to protect against terrorists and anecdotes about kidnappings that might have been thwarted if the police had been able to listen in on kidnappers' phone calls. Businesses, overgeneralizing only slightly, would be happy if the government could eavesdrop on everyone in ways that couldn't be duplicated; but computer power grows so quickly that anything the NSA can do now will be doable by criminals in five or ten years. Civil libertarians, of course, reject the "we're your government, trust us" idea, pointing to a long history of appalling government overreach such as the FBI bugging Martin Luther King's bedroom looking for something they could use to blackmail him.
Businesses want security for financial transactions. Everyone else wants that, too, but businesses have a long history of shooting themselves in the foot with Rube Goldberg security mechanisms that turn out to be horribly insecure, so that if criminals find a weak point in a bank in Thailand or Nigeria, they can use it to siphon millions of dollars from US banks before anyone notices that it's happening. The real point of contention between business and anyone else is about the collection of personal information on customers or users of their services for advertising purposes. The very existence of such personal dossiers turns into a security problem when the information is misused, as in the Cambridge Analytica use of information fraudulently obtained from Facebook to manipulate the 2016 US presidential election. The central business argument is that collection of personal information for targeted advertising is what enables the provision of free online services to consumers. Governments in Europe and California, but as of 2020 not in the other 49 states, argue that people do have a right to privacy. And civil libertarians, after nearly a century of focusing on governments as the only threat to privacy and other civil liberties, have learned to see Facebook, Google, and a handful of other giga-companies as equally serious threats.
Civil libertarians (not to be confused with Libertarians, a right-wing political movement) argue the apparently-controversial position that individual people have rights to privacy, free speech, freedom of assembly, freedom from arbitrary arrest, freedom from cruel and unusual punishment, and so on. With respect to computers and security, they argue that people have the right to control over information about themselves, that neither businesses nor governments should spy on people, and that there should be a right to anonymous speech. (That last point really is controversial, because anonymous speech includes anonymous bullying, anonymous pornography, and other social ills. Civil libertarians argue that solutions to bullying must be found that won't require people to identify themselves before speaking against government oppression.) In a more-or-less democratic society like the US, nobody actually argues against civil liberties. Instead they appeal to emotions ("Lock her up!") or attempt to carve out exceptions that are too heinous to deserve the same civil liberties as the rest of us (e.g., Muslims after 9/11).

Page 5: Security Risks
Exercise 1: The broad categories of ways to get to your data are physical access (breaking into your house), "social engineering" (convincing you or some human gatekeeper to provide a password or other access—this includes phishing), and malware (criminal software that attacks your computer from the Internet).
Page 6: What Can You Do? (There are no exercises for which solutions would be needed.)

