Page 1: Your Image in the Cloud
There are no right answers to these questions, whose purpose is to start students thinking about what information about them is on the net. They'll easily think of the things they post on purpose, such as their Facebook profile. (But they might not be aware of who can see that profile, which includes companies whose products they've "liked.") But have they ever bought anything online? If so, their name as addressee is probably connected with their parent's name as credit card holder. Have they borrowed a library book? Was it about politics, race, or sexuality? (Libraries are generally very good about deleting your borrowing history once you return the book, and they don't target ads to you. But they're not immune to breakins.) Is there anything in their browsing history they wouldn't want their parents to see? Have they been to the doctor? Their medical history is online and available to any doctor anywhere, to their insurance company, and in part to drugstore personnel.

Page 2: Examining Privacy
Exercise 3:
Possible responses about voluntarily giving up privacy are in the yellow hint box.
Risks range from embarrassment to identity theft. For children, including teenagers, there is a special risk of abuse by strangers, either through kidnapping or through persuasiveness. Don't make that be the main topic of discussion, since it's much less likely than other risks. Identity theft may seen unrealistic to a teenager, who has no credit to steal, but once online, their information stays online forever.

Ask students to imagine that 25 years from now they run for President. Is there anything on their Facebook page that opposing candidates could use to hurt their campaign? It'll still be accessible then.

Here are some possible answers to problem 5, Who is threatening your privacy?

Government threats to privacy are the easiest to see, especially in the post-Snowden era. It's important for students to understand that these threats aren't new; that's why the Constitution prohibited unwarranted search or seizure over 200 years ago. On the other hand, they should also understand how dramatically government behavior changed after 9/11. Besides the NSA and the police agencies, government threats include the IRS and more obscure data collection. For example, sales of real estate are public records, and often include Social Security numbers. This wasn't so important when you had to visit the county clerk's office to search the records, but now they're online.
The corporate threats everyone talks about are Google and Facebook. But the sharing of information among banks and credit bureaus is equally problematic. Internet Service Providers read the data you send or receive over the net. You can use DuckDuckGo for your web searches instead of Google, but it's hard to avoid using either the phone company or the cable company as your ISP (or your ISP's ISP). A loophole in the laws preventing national police data collection allows the police to buy the data from private companies that do the collection for them.
Smartphone owners can record video in public places. This has given rise to a culture of shaming. That can be a good thing when police brutality is documented by a passerby, but incidents like the widespread harassment of "Dog Poop Girl" are troubling. (Since that first example, there have been several more online posting of videos of other dog poop violators.)
Page 3: Tanya Rider's Story
Exercise 2: Here are two possible answers.
How about if the cell phone company was allowed to tell the Red Cross where the missing person's cell phone is? Or the Fire Department?
How about if the rule were different for a moving cell phone in a city vs. a stationary cell phone in the middle of nowhere?
Page 4: Innovations and Privacy (There are no exercises for which solutions would be needed.)