Lab 2: Simulations
Page 1: Why Use Simulations?
Exercise 1:
Impractical: Add a lane to the highway and see if that improves the traffic jams. What if it's a carpool lane? Etc.
Impossible: Suppose gravity followed an inverse-cube law instead of inverse-square. What would planetary orbits look like? A more real-life example is that physicists want to know about the nature of physical laws during the first fraction of a second after the creation of the universe.
Unethical: We are writing these solutions during the COVID-19 pandemic, and so there are many real-life examples of things researchers want to know that are hard to find out without deliberately infecting volunteers, such as how long an infected person remains contagious, and what fraction of infected people develop symptoms.
Exercise 2: Simulations allow performing quasi-experiments in the computer model, and the results can indicate likely results if the same experiment were made in the real world. Visual display of information can help people understand the phenomena; for example, a computer can display a planetary orbit so the experimenter can see the result rather than just seeing equations describing the result.
Pro: Computers can model the impractical, impossible, or unethical situations that would otherwise not be available for experiments. Even when something can be done in the real world, computer modeling is generally much cheaper and faster, so many experiments can be made instead of only a few. (For example, auto body designs are tested in simulated wind tunnels many times, until the designers think they have the optimal shape, and only then do they actually build a physical car and try it in a physical wind tunnel.)
Con: There's only one big problem with computer modeling, but it's a crucial one: The simplifications made in building the computer model may be more important than the developers think, and so the results may not really be correct. This is especially likely when modeling very complex systems, in which a small error in one piece of the model may have much larger effects in other pieces. A related problem is that sometimes the model-builders make simplifications that they know are importantly wrong, but they don't know how to build a better one. For example, many economists assume that everyone in a society has perfect access to relevant information, and always behaves rationally. This is so wrong that their conclusions aren't very convincing to anyone who looks at a real economy. The risk of oversimplified assumptions is particularly great in social sciences, where prejudice based on race, sex, etc. can affect the simulation. (Prejudice can affect real-world experiments, too, but at least the assumptions are more visible and can be criticized.)
