Lab 5: Computing in War
Page 1: War and Technology
Exercise 1: If you have a Super Soaker and your friend just has a squirt gun, you will win!
Exercise 2: Offensive technologies: Swords, knives, chemical explosives (a long list of them), fishing line (as garotte), bombs, guns, bayonets, cannons, catapults, fire, poison (e.g., in water source), Trojan horse, regular horses, malware, nuclear bombs, gas (poisonous, corrosive), ships, airplanes, missiles, satellites, drones, lasers, lots more.

Defensive technologies: Walls, armor, shields, various spying technologies, vast stockpile of offensive weapons used as deterrent, alarms, radar, more.

Exercise 3: Metal-clad ships were fairly new at the time of the Civil War. Wooden ships were not only easier for cannonball to penetrate, but very vulnerable to fire. The South were first (1861) to deploy an ironclad, but by 1862 the North had seven smaller ironclads, as well as the large USS Monitor. Seeing an urgent need to match the Monitor, the South raised the scuttled (deliberately sunk) USS Merrimack, clad it in iron, and rechristened it the CSS Virginia. The first battle (worldwide) between two ironclads was the Battle of Hampton Roads, in which the Virginia was destroying several wooden ships of the North until the barely-built Monitor rushed to the scene and drove off the Virginia. Both ships survived the encounter, but each was destroyed later in the war. It quickly became clear that a wooden ship could not survive battle with an ironclad.

The gunpowder that provided the propellant force for rifles until the 1880s filled battlefields with thick black smoke, making it hard to tell allies from enemies. Bright colored uniforms helped improve visibility. Improved weaponry reduced the smoke problem, at which point it became more important to keep one's own soldiers hidden from the enemy. Dull colors that blended with the landscape then became the standard.

Before airplanes were used in warfare, there were generally well-defined battlefields, and rules of war disallowed attacks on civilians. But military airplanes don't have riflemen; they have bombs, which kill people over a wide area. A civilian anywhere near a battlefield could no longer rely on being protected by wearing civilian clothing. And once air war became common, it didn't take long until bombs were dropped on cities. Today there is really no such thing as a "noncombatant."

Page 2: Computers and War (The exercises on this page are mostly "Look up..." and so the "solutions" are in your search engine.)
Page 3: Military Technology in Everyday Life
Exercise 1: All military, of course:
The story of the Manhattan Project is well known. Physicists understood the theoretical possibility of a chain reaction, but actually achieving one took an enormous amount of effort and money, made available because of the fear that the Nazis would solve the problem first.
GPS was a Defense Department project, motivated originally by the desire to get very precise coordinates for bombings of specific buildings, but also used to allow battlefield officers to know precisely which soldier is where despite the chaos of battle.
The Internet was meant to ensure high-reliability communication through network redundancy, and to allow more efficient use of communication circuits through packet switching, which allows many conversations over the same circuit. Many people believe that the technology was developed specifically for the sake of a network that would survive a nuclear attack on the United States, but this is apparently not the case. (For one thing, few computers would survive the strong electromagnetic pulse that is a side effect of a nuclear explosion.)
Exercise 2: The Roomba automatic vacuum cleaner started life as a military robot. Drones, first used as weapons, are now widely available for news coverage and even as toys. Radar, developed to detect enemy missiles or vehicles, is now used to police highway speed (unpopular, but life-saving) and to enable adaptive cruise control (which slows down your car if it get too near to the car in front of it). Several weapons, especially non-fatal ones, have moved from military to police use, e.g., tear gas. The technology to develop vaccines also serves to develop biological weapons (although they are outlawed by international treaties). Night vision technology has many civilian uses but its export is regulated as a munition because soldiers use it for night attacks.
Exercise 3: This question is deliberately phrased provocatively. The first part is rhetorical; of course killing someone is worse than deleting their computer files. But the second is not rhetorical. It's important to understand that institutions have a character of their own, separate from that of the people who make up the institution. Nobody at the ACM is in favor of killing people! But their principles for the conduct of members are, at best, silent on the question, while voluble about lesser harms.
Exercise 4: This is a question about ethics, not about computer science, and there is room for disagreement. But students who argue that the United States should have the best possible weapons, because we're the good guys, should read Wikipedia's list of wars involving the United States. Compare the two occasions in all of its history when the United States was invaded militarily and had to defend itself (War of 1812, Pearl Harbor) with the countless invasions of other countries by the US. (This is not to suggest that the US is especially evil! But it's not especially benevolent either. It's a country like many others.)
